TURKEY BOMB
===========

Anonymous

Introduction
------------

TURKEY BOMB, the first known programming-language-cum-drinking-game,
evolved independently on four seperate continents and was widely used as
an implementation base for computer operating systems for several
centuries.

Later, when computers were proven beyond a shadow of a doubt to be the
malevolent work of unseen evil forces, and digital technology was banned
on punishment of bodily disintigration, TURKEY BOMB thrived on, only
slightly modified, as a popular drinking game.

Now that the treaty negotiations between the UN and the world of unseen
evil forces have been signed, however, computers are back (and in full
force, now billions upon billions of times more efficient than they once
were,) and TURKEY BOMB's popularity as a computer programming language
may just be making a comeback!

Archaeologists have recently uncovered the largest known collection of
TURKEY BOMB articles. Dating from A.D. 2014 and apparently an almanac of
black magic of some sort, with the cryptic title "Communications of the
ACM," the remains of an almost-four-hundred-year-old periodical is
practically all historians have to go on.

Even then, this obscure grimoire talks of this language as if it were an
already-established phenomenon - indeed, perhaps dating back to the tail
end of the second millenium of A.D. For this reason, some scholars
attribute the widespread popularity of this language to one CLIN\_TON, a
great leader of the time. It is said that CLIN\_TON was such an
excellent and heroic TURKEY BOMB jockey that "he never inhaled",
although that is largely deemed myth, perhaps connected to the
allegorical story of his close followers who "blew him good".

Our knowledge of the time in which TURKEY BOMB originated is slim,
indeed. As such, the remainder of this document is by no means a
complete reconstruction of the language, for that is surely impossible.
However, it *is* an attempt to organize, apparently for the first time
ever, the elements of TURKEY BOMB in a human-referencable fashion.

Description
-----------

To fully and exactly understand TURKEY BOMB one must first grok the
ancient art of computer programming while under the influence of
recreational consumables. If you are already under the influence (and
why else would you be reading a document about a language named TURKEY
BOMB,) congratulations, you've already taken your first steps on the
road of becoming an expert TURKEY BOMB programmer/jockey.

But do not be lulled into thinking that simply ingesting an amusing
chemical will ensure your vainglorious TURKEY BOMB hobby or career! No
indeed, for it is the most wise and experienced programmer who needs no
more buzz than to program in TURKEY BOMB itself. Many teatotalling
hackers excel at the Annual International TURKEY BOMB Open in Maui for
this very reason. (See you there this fall!)

Data Types
----------

Name

Description

Size

`   ZILCH`

"A little slice of Nirvana."

Zero.

`   BI_IT`

A composite quantum state of information.

Two thirds of a bit plus half a trit.

`   AMICED`

A conceptual quantum state of information.

Negative six sevenths of a decimal digit.

`   TRIVIA CONCERNING type`

Three references: one to an object of the named type, two to TRIVIA
objects.

Exactly fifteen bytes, no exceptions.

`   ADVISORY PERTAINING TO type`

A quarter of a reference to a object of the given type.

A quarter of the platform-defined pointer size.

`   GRUBSTEAK`

A fraction whose numerator is a perfect square and whose denominator is
a prime number.

No bigger than necessary.

`   IMPROPER GRUBSTEAK`

A GRUBSTEAK whose denominator is less than the square root of the
numerator.

Same as GRUBSTEAK.

`   INDECENT GRUBSTEAK`

A fraction whose numerator is a perfect square of a perfect square and
whose denominator is a prime number whose ordinal position in the
counting list of prime numbers is also prime.

In the drinking game, whenever an INDECENT GRUBSTEAK is involved in an
expression, everyone starts chanting "BANG BANG BANG!!!" until the
player holding the TURKEY BOMB either finishes their drink and starts
another, or falls down (in which case someone who hasn't been playing
should take him or her home).

Same as GRUBSTEAK.

`   NOMENCLATURE`

A set of variable names, defined by an EBNF expression that must contain
at least one { } (repeated 0 or more times) term.

As big as possible.

`   PUDDING`

An unknowable value.

Infinite.

`   HUMIDOR BUILT UP   FROM type, type & type`

A structure containing three other types, specified at compile-time, all
of which must be different, one of which must be another HUMIDOR.

Infinite.

`   HYBRID OBTAINED BY   COMBINING type & type   [WITH GUSTO]`

A unified structure containing data from two different types, specified
at compile time.

The average size of the two types... which may present problems when
accuracy of representation is desired, which is why the WITH GUSTO
clause is made available to pad the size of a HYBRID to the larger of
the sizes of it's two consitituent data types.

`   TURKEY BOMB`

A mysterious and shadowy type, suspected to be a reference to itself.
There can only be one (no more, no less) variable of type TURKEY BOMB,
and it is predeclared under the variable name TURKEY BOMB. A variable of
type TURKEY BOMB (that is to say, the variable named TURKEY BOMB) can
only take on one value, that value being TURKEY BOMB.

Exactly 1 TURKEY BOMB.

Paradigm
--------

When TURKEY BOMB is played as a drinking game, the TURKEY BOMB is
represented by a real object - usually something convenient, like a
shoe, when an impromptu game is played for fun, but the real hardcore
TURKEY BOMB junkies insist on using either a real live turkey, or a real
live time bomb, or ideally, both (tied *securely* together).

The TURKEY BOMB is then passed from player to player while the referee
(operating system) designates challengers (tasks). The chosen challenger
takes a deep breath (inhales) and shouts an expression at the player
holding the TURKEY BOMB. If the player can produce the correct result
before the referee can, they only have to take a sip of their drink
before passing off the TURKEY BOMB. Otherwise, it's the whole thing,
down the hatch.

If the player holding the TURKEY BOMB makes an error, they must down
their drink and get another before trying again. If the referee makes an
error, *everyone*, especially the referee, must down their drink, and
get another.

Variables are also declared by any player spontaneously standing up and
shouting out a name that hasn't been mentioned yet, and a type to go
with it, at any time.

For these reasons, TURKEY BOMB should not be considered as much an
imperative language as a "peer-pressure" one.

Syntax
------

There are no comments in TURKEY BOMB; it's entire content is considered
a comment on those who program/play it.

Operators
---------

Syntax

Description

`   BI_IT BI_IT BI_IT ! BI_IT BI_IT BI_IT`

2-bit NAND, rotate known trit left.

`   BI_IT BI_IT ? BI_IT BI_IT ? BI_IT BI_IT`

3-argument trit operation; unfortunately the Ancient Texts seem unclear
on what it actually does. (The closest English translation appears to be
"take these trits three and meditate soundly upon them.")

`   $ BI_IT BI_IT BI_IT BI_IT BI_IT BI_IT $`

Attempt to make a GRUBSTEAK.

`   TRIVIA Y EXPR Y TRIVIA`

Attempt to make a TRIVIA.

`   TRIVIA BI_IT //`

Attempt to connect a TRIVIA to itself and return it. The BI\_IT argument
is required, but serves no detectably useful purpose (hardcore followers
of the drinking game tradition insist that it's for good luck.)

`   & EXPR`

Do not evaluate EXPR. Not particularly useful when programming in TURKEY
BOMB, but wow, can one of these ever screw you up in the middle of a
game.

`   \ ADVISORY ADVISORY ADVISORY ADVISORY`

Returns the type thus pointed to. Also, the player holding the TURKEY
BOMB must pass it off.

`   HYBRID.type`

Casts a HYBRID to either type it was defined with.

`   HUMIDOR.type`

Retrieves an element from a HUMIDOR.

`   @ HUMIDOR`

Retrieves a PUDDING which represents the entire HUMIDOR.

`   PUDDING!!!!!`

Attempts to deduce the existance of a HUMIDOR in the given PUDDING. The
player to the left of the player holding the TURKEY BOMB has to keep
drinking continuously while the computer/referee does their deducing.

`   ALL BUT EXPR`

Returns a PUDDING indicating everything but EXPR.

`   WHEREFORE ART EXPR`

Returns a PUDDING indicating the entire metaphysical nature of EXPR.

`   WHEREFORE AIN'T EXPR`

Short for WHEREFORE ART ALL BUT EXPR.

`   WHEREFOREN'T EXPR`

Short for ALL BUT WHEREFORE ART EXPR.

`   GARNISH PUDDING`

Convolutes the PUDDING with recent context drawn from the program. The
player holding the TURKEY BOMB must pass it off.

`   IMAGINE PUDDING, PUDDING!`

Returns a NOMENCLATURE indicating all the variables unchanged between
two PUDDINGs.

`   EXPR :-> NOMENCLATURE`

Mass-assign the set of variables.

`   < NOMENCLATURE`

Mass-retrieve the set of variables.

`   NOMENCLATURE % GRUBSTEAK GRUBSTEAK`

Perform iterative cypher transformation of set of names.

Notes
-----

The drinking game can also be played in an asylum, replacing 'drink'
with 'medication'. Do *not* play this game with LSD.
